---
layout: post
title: "5 Things I Learned About Design While Living Abroad for 6 Months"
date: 2015-05-21 09:35:00 +0200
comments: true
published: false
categories:
- Life
- Technology
- Design
- UX
---

I've been living abroad in France for the past six months, since December. We had originally planned for me to work during this time (and to stay longer) but sometimes things don't work out. Still, it was a blessing in disguise as we've been able to travel and I've been able to observe and learn about how people around the world use technology that has affected the way I think about how I build software and websites.

Here are 5 things I've learned during my 6 months living abroad:

## 1. Mobile is well and truly ubiquitous

We know phones are ubiquitous, right? But I don't think I truly understood until I traveled around and saw it for myself in "the wild."

When we walked through the Cyberparc in Morocco, we saw people from all walks of life gathering and sitting around the park. Were they frolicking through the gardens? No, although the gardens were beautiful. The Cyberparc in Marrakech is actually a **fully connected park** and offers free Wi-Fi for anyone that wants to connect. They even have touch kiosks with Chrome installed on them. The Cyberparc is sponsored by some industry leaders, including IBM and HP. United States, please get on this.

I was watching as pre-teens and adults would take their phones out (typically not Galaxy S4s, by the way, but small ones) and would use WhatsApp or browse the mobile web on them. Not only were they using "low-end" hardware they were trying to use sites **we build**. Can your site even run on a low-end Android phone? Can *mine*?! It was an eye-opener. As the community flocks to all-Javascript, all-the-time frameworks like Angular, I sit here wondering if that's really a good idea if you really want to *reach* people, everyday people.

Even in a modern city like the one we lived in in France, Internet connectivity is available but not optimal. The fastest we can get in the city center is 15Mbps, which is pretty good but nothing like the 40-100Mbps I can get in Minneapolis. Mobile is a bit better, with access to LTE and 4G for most subscribers on the major networks. 

People are using their phones everywhere, way more than they are using laptops (if they even own one). People don't sit outside here on their MacBooks. They browse and consume on their tiny little phones. Teens sit on the stairs of a building in the historic city center of Marseille, their thumbs dancing across the screen of WhatsApp sending emotes to their friends. Adults sit at a cafe, sipping espresso on the canal streets of Amsterdam as they type on their iPad. Commuters stand in the Paris metro, headphones plugged-in playing Candy Crush Saga on their Windows Phones. Business people in suits walk briskly through the streets of central London, phone in hand checking their emails. Merchants in the souks of Marrakech discuss politics over some mint tea while checking Twitter or the news on their phone. Your driver is chatting with his friend in Arabic as you head 200km through the countryside to a village in Morocco. This isn't made up, these are all things I've observed first-hand.

The truth is, when we design, we typically design for ourselves, in a bubble. I think we're all guilty of it. It's not until you're out there, "amongst the people", that you realize that maybe testing your site on the high-end phones and super-fast LAN networks might not be representative of the people using your site. I brought my brother's laptop with me and it really sucks for development. It's slow. Still, it's kind of a good thing, the pain I feel while developing forces me to live through every slow cycle the CPU churns out as Visual Studio pauses between keystrokes, or Chrome chugging on [my] poorly written Javascript. Performance matters but We are Designers and we work on big rigs so we don't feel that pain as much as we should.

I challenge to you to pull out that dusty Dell laptop from 2004 or your 1st-gen iPad and try running your site. If it does, you might be reaching way more people across the world than you thought. If it doesn't... well, it's up to you to decide. From the souks of Marrakech to the canal streets of Amsterdam, it's all the same:  **Mobile. Is. Ubiquitous.** And it is used **everywhere** in **every** setting imaginable.

## 2. You can learn about design from transportation networks

If you want to learn about designing for everyone, you can't do much better than being a tourist and navigating the transportation networks of the world. The variance between cities is astounding.

**Amsterdam**

Amsterdam has fantastic real-time traffic data for buses, trams, and trains. This data is not only available on Google Maps but is also shown live **on the buses and trams**, making it crazy easy to get around. Their tram system also has an electronic check-in/out system where you check-in as you walk into the tram and check-out as you go out. This sounds good in writing but in practice it is confusing to tourists (or non-Amsterdam natives) as only **certain** doors can be used to exit. Clearly the designers wanted to help expedite the boarding/off-boarding process but it also makes it very confusing for first-time users expecting to get on and off through the same doors. Furthermore, there is **constant** reminders to check-in and off because if you forget to check-in, you'll be fined, or if you check-out *without* checking-in, the next check-in will cost a lot more than you anticipated since it calculates fare from check-in to check-out.

**Dublin & London**

London Underground offers the easy-to-use Oyster card for checking in and out with pay-as-you-go discounts; it's accessible to tourists moreso than typical travel cards. Instead of the paper ticketing system, you just tap your card on the reader at the entrances and exits of the station. The route maps and signs are also super clear about direction and major stops along a route. In the Victoria station (and elsewhere), lines run across the floor indicating the path to specific areas of the station (Tube, Gatwick Express, etc.).

The Dublin tram/lightrail was essentially the same as the Minneapolis system where you buy a ticket before boarding (making you anxious about missing it). One thing that it had over Minneapolis though was a clear LED screen that told you when the next tram was coming and what direction it was going in. Last time we checked, Minneapolis *still* didn't have real-time traffic data available at the lightrail stops.

**Oslo**

The Oslo T-Bane is well-designed for the Norwegians who love to ski and do activities. The metro cars are super-wide with plenty of leg/aisle space for skis and equipment. It even goes straight from the city center up into the forest to the ski area. We saw people literally skiing out the doors of the metro into the snow-covered forest.

**France**

The Paris metro is easy to navigate but not as easy as the London Underground and certainly not as easy as the Oyster card. Both the Tube and the Paris metro use terminal stops to indicate the direction of a metro line but LU goes farther--it also includes the direction (North/South/East/West) **and** major stops along the way. The Paris metro leaves these two other data points out, making it harder to understand if the side you're standing on is the right way until you look at the route maps more closely.

One thing I liked about the Paris metro vs. LU was that the signs for the Paris metro are easier to see. The Underground signs in London are 2D (you can't see them directly from the side) but the Paris ones are cubes, making them easier to see in the hustle and bustle of traffic and pedestrians. The Paris metro stops are also easier to stumble across because they go directly down into the ground, versus London where they are usually buildings you walk into. Furthermore, the Paris entrances are on both sides of the street whereas the Underground only has specific exits. Sometimes it depends on the stop but in most cases these held true.

The Paris metro also deals in paper tickets, many of whose remains can be seen thrown on the ground and littered across the metro. Not only is the Oyster card more *convenient*, it also is friendlier to the environment.

(image)

Train travel is common in Europe and is operated primarily by SNCF in France. Their website (Rail Europe) for English speakers is really helpful in explaining the difference between reservations vs. passes and for stitching together multiple train rides which we did on our tour of Rennes, Nantes, and Bordeaux. The train station themselves are designed well, including one feature that was very notable: the presence of a piano. I mean it, every station we've been in has featured a piano that *anyone* can play. I'm not sure how that would go down in the US, but in France it appeared that only people who knew how to play piano used it and there's just something about waiting at the train station listening to the overture of Pirates of the Carribean or the thumping Game of Thrones theme that puts a smile on your face in a boring or stressful situation. The stations are well-designed to boot, with train diagrams indicating the coach numbers and platform.

(image)

## 3. Design for tourists is a lesson in tutorials and accessibility

Did you ever stop to think that when you're a tourist, your experience is really **designed** by the city? Some cities do it well, others do it poorly or not at all. As soon as you arrive in a new city, you might be equipped with a LonelyPlanet guide but that's not enough to prepare you for what you experience. Even with a hefty amount of tips from us, our friends still took awhile to figure out the Paris metro (RER vs. Metro?).

One of the best examples of good tourism design is Nantes, France. First, the tram stop is clearly marked and visible from the exit of the train station--this is not always the case. Second, throughout **the entire city** is a green painted line on the pavement, on the sidewalk, on the roads, everywhere. If you follow this line, you will be led to most, if not all, of the common tourist stops in Nantes. GENIUS. If you were lost, follow the green line back to a landmark. Next, along the route of the green line, there was a subtle scavenger hunt.

(image)

See those guys? They were peppered throughout the city along the route of the green line. So not only was the green line *helpful*, it made me want to follow it by discovering all the videogame characters--it was **fun**. In the end, I saw about 10. I have no idea if the characters were intentionally put there by the city but whoever did it was a genius because it made me want to explore the city (and we did). I had to collect them all!

The other excellent thing we found in Nantes was a free eating guide, shown below.

(image)

This was a well-designed guide to all the restaurants and cafes in Nantes. Unlike many sources, including Foursquare and TripAdvisor, they provided the schedule of the restaurant along with a min/max dish price. Fantastic for planning on where to go; it was like doing an Advanced Search in a book ("OK, what has a price below 12 euros but is also an Editor's Choice and open on Mondays?"), you could easily scan the book to answer that question. By the way, the answer is Shalimar, a **fantastic** Indian/Pakistani bistro where I had superb beef madras.

Nobody is perfect though. The tram system in Nantes was real confusing because the kiosks **did not** explain the difference between the 2-3 types of tickets you could get ("Which one is the TRAM ticket, damn it?!"). Instead it only had the name of the network (which did not include the words "tram" or "lightrail" or anything indicative of what kind of transport it was). Eventually we saw the network logo on the tram and bought a ticket for that network.

Oslo was another example of some great tourism design. Oslo is known for being one of the most expensive cities in the world and our experience backed that up (**one** small Chipotle-sized taco for $8, uhhhhh). So *our* primary motivation when visiting Oslo was to spend as little money as possible. Well, a local company called [UseIt](http://www.use-it.no/) sources advice and tips from locals to provide a super handy guide to the city including things to do, cheap eats, and really cool walks (like the Art Walk) along with free maps. We found the guide in our Airbnb room but they had an office in the city center near the tourism office. They even let you store your luggage there and use the free Internet--two things that travelers might desperately need in an emergency or unplanned event. Kudos, UseIt team!

Tourism design is essentially designing a tutorial or introduction to your city for newcomers. Now think of **your app** as a city. We *try* to design for FTU (first-time users) on apps and sites but often we leave it until they actually *join* or use a fancy new feature. We should be providing the information they need *immediately*, as soon as they arrive in our beautiful city whether by car or foot ("Tourism Office ->") or by train, plane, or bus (free guides at the station!). Great tourism design gets the visitor familiar and provides the information they need to plan their visit and ideally, spend the *most* of their time (and money) actually *doing* things in your city. Sometimes they've planned ahead and for others it might just be a quick stop on the way to another destination, whatever the motivation, make sure you've designed for it.

It starts as soon as they arrive, so take a look at the entrances to your site--do they give the visitor the information they need to navigate your beautiful city? Have you explained your 3 methods of transport? Or they do they leave frustrated and discontent, ready to move to the next city on their agenda?

## 4. There are a lot of people in this world

This might be a no-brainer, just like saying mobile is ubiquitous. But again, has the *magnitude* really hit you?

When I design I design English first. This is all well and good for us English-speakers but when you're living in France, trying to use French-made apps like the local theater app, you curse the designer for not adding an English localization. But can you blame them?! They are just doing what we do, writing in their native tongue. It's the same everywhere. There are SO MANY local apps--there's RueCentrale for local restaurants, Cinema Aixois for local movies in Aix-en-Provence, there's Capitain Traine, Voyages SNCF, and Ouigo for planning train rides, PACA Mobilite for bus routes *solely* for southern France, and Marmiton, the AllRecipes of France. Apps are everywhere and you don't even know they exist until you're in the region they're used. On top of that, *most* of them are not localized. Just take a look at my France folder on my phone:

(image)

What about your apps? What about *my* apps? I usually don't even stop to think about how things differ between countries like dates (DD/MM/YYYY vs. MM/DD/YYYY), telephone number formats (+33 01 02 05 06 07), time (24h vs. 12h format) or how an American living in France can't wrap their head around the metric system when trying to cook or bake. Bravo to AllRecipes for including an automated Metric conversion for recipes so we can use our measuring cups here on American recipes.

I don't even know what libraries to use for localizing JavaScript apps because I haven't done it! I know how to do it in .NET, as I've done localization before (once in French, even) but that's most of the extent of my experience. Why is that? For one, it's just **easier** to write code with strings in English. Anytime you begin to introduce other formatting and cultures, things get more hairy. It shouldn't be that way! Another reason is simply because it's easy to just assume people will speak English but this is a bad assumption. We've met a ton of French, Moroccans, and to a limited extent even Dutch who don't know any English and they're automatically excluded from using your apps simply due to their language. Even **the English** speak a different language than Americans. Some have jokingly commented that they can't understand us (well, I don't understand you, friends. *Bobbies*? Really?). We didn't get to travel to any Asian countries but I imagine it's the same everywhere or even more pronounced. **Even** if someone is fluent in English, we use idioms and slang they might not be familiar with. Take a second look at your copy on your apps. Would someone whose second language is English understand what you're even saying?

Living somewhere else for an extended period of time really makes you appreciate when a designer has thought about localization and location. We need to do better. *I* need to do better. The world is a big place and there are a *ton* of people in it--are you designing for everyone or just yourself?

## 5. If you have the means, see the world

Or at least get out of your comfort zone. I've learned a ton just by being a visitor, a tourist, to all these locations. 

Make a goal to travel someplace away from your comfortable home sweet home. Maybe it's only a week or maybe, **if** you can do it, save up and take a sabbatical. We are lucky that we had a chance to do this and I understand not everyone can travel, especially for such an extended amount of time. You might have children, you might be in a different phase of life, you might be falling on hard times, there could be any number of things preventing you from traveling. If you have the means, try. At the least, just get out and tour your own city and observe the people in it! You might see things differently when you're the one trying to get around or sitting at a cafe watching people use technology. 

After all, what are you working for, if not to better yourself and learn--living and experiencing new things is a sure way to grow. It has affected the way I think about design and I think it's important to observe things for yourself. 

Challenge yourself. I didn't think I'd be into going to Morocco but it was **amazing** and I'd go back again. Using GPS to navigate the labyrinth of souks while being hassled by shop owners is definitely an experience you won't get anywhere else.

(image)
